README.md, before:

# nip4 --- a user interface for libvips

This is a reworking of [nip2](https://github.com/libvips/nip2) for the gtk4
UI toolkit and the vips8 image processing library.

There's a news post on libvips.org with an introduction:

https://www.libvips.org/2025/03/20/introduction-to-nip4.html

If you used nip2, there's another post outlining the main changes in the
new interface:

https://www.libvips.org/2025/03/12/nip4-for-nip2-users.html

# Introduction

nip4 is a spreadsheet-like interface to the [libvips image processing
library](https://libvips.github.io/libvips). 
You create a set of formula connecting your objects together, and on a change 
nip4 will recalculate. Because nip4 uses libvips as the image processing engine 
it can handle  very large images, recalculates quickly, and only needs a little memory.
It scales to fairly complex workflows: I've used it to develop systems with
more than 10,000 cells, analyzing images of many tens of gigabytes.

nip4 can load all workspaces from nip2, the previous version of this program.
It has a batch mode, so you can run any image processing system you develop
from the command-line and without a GUI. It is purely functional, meaning 
there is no assignment and there are no side effects, and it is fully lazy, meaning
all computation is driven by the user interface, down to the pixel level.

[![Screenshot](images/shot1.png)](images/shot1.png)

The CHARISMA workspace for museum technical imaging.

[![Screenshot](images/shot2.png)](images/shot2.png)

A 10,000 node workspace that computes per-voxel Patlaks from PET-CT scans.

# Installing

## Windows

There's a zip for each version on the [releases
page](https://github.com/jcupitt/nip4/releases). Download
`nip4-x86_64-9.0.11.zip`, unzip somewhere, and run `bin/nip4.exe`.

## macOS

nip4 is in [homebrew](https://brew.sh/), so just:

```
brew install nip4
```

The not-yet-released libvips 8.18 has some performance improvements
that help nip4 image rendering a lot. Until 8.18 is released, experts can
patch their homebrew install for a good speedup.

## Linux-like systems with flatpak

Add flathub to your set of repositories:

```shell
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists \
  flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

Then install nip4 with:

```shell
flatpak install org.libvips.nip4
```

## From source

Download the sources, then build and install with eg.:

```
cd nip4-x.y.x
meson setup build --prefix /my/install/prefix
cd build
meson compile
meson test
meson install
```

Check the output of `meson setup` carefully.

## From source for Windows

Clone:

https://github.com/libvips/build-win64-mxe

Build with eg.:

```
$ ./build.sh --target x86_64-w64-mingw32.shared --nightly nip4
```

## Build from source for flathub

Add the `flathub` repo, if you don't already have it:

```shell
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists \
  flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

Install the gtk4 SDK and runtime:

```shell
flatpak install org.gnome.Sdk//49
flatpak install org.gnome.Platform//49
```

Allow file. Recent security changes to git will cause submodule checkout
to fail inside flatpak. If you get errors like `fatal: transport 'file'
not allowed`, re-enable file transport with:

```shell
git config --global protocol.file.allow always
```

You need the latest `flatpak-builder` (the one in deb is not new enough),
install with:

```
flatpak install org.flatpak.Builder
```

Build and try running it:

```shell
flatpak run org.flatpak.Builder --force-clean --user --install build-dir org.libvips.nip4.json
flatpak run org.libvips.nip4 ~/pics/k2.jpg
```

Force a complete redownload and rebuild (should only rarely be necessary) with:

```shell
rm -rf .flatpak-builder
```

Check the files that are in the flatpak you built with:

```shell
ls build-dir/files
```

Uninstall with:

```shell
flatpak uninstall nip4
```

## Notes on flatpak build process

- niftiio is annoying to build, skip it.

- we skip imagemagick as well, too huge

## Packaging for flathub

Install the appdata checker:

```shell
flatpak install flathub org.freedesktop.appstream-glib
flatpak run org.freedesktop.appstream-glib validate org.libvips.nip4.metainfo.xml
```

Also:

```shell
desktop-file-validate org.libvips.nip4.desktop
```

## Uploading to flathub

Make a PR on:

        https://github.com/flathub/org.libvips.nip4

then check the build status here:

        https://flathub.org/builds/#/apps/org.libvips.nip4

On success, merge to master.

Commit message:

note how to disable Vulkan rendering
See https://github.com/libvips/nip2/issues/125

README.md, after:

# nip4 --- a user interface for libvips

This is a reworking of [nip2](https://github.com/libvips/nip2) for the gtk4
UI toolkit and the vips8 image processing library.

There's a news post on libvips.org with an introduction:

https://www.libvips.org/2025/03/20/introduction-to-nip4.html

If you used nip2, there's another post outlining the main changes in the
new interface:

https://www.libvips.org/2025/03/12/nip4-for-nip2-users.html

# Introduction

nip4 is a spreadsheet-like interface to the [libvips image processing
library](https://libvips.github.io/libvips).
You create a set of formula connecting your objects together, and on a change
nip4 will recalculate. Because nip4 uses libvips as the image processing engine
it can handle  very large images, recalculates quickly, and only needs a little memory.
It scales to fairly complex workflows: I've used it to develop systems with
more than 10,000 cells, analyzing images of many tens of gigabytes.

nip4 can load all workspaces from nip2, the previous version of this program.
It has a batch mode, so you can run any image processing system you develop
from the command-line and without a GUI. It is purely functional, meaning
there is no assignment and there are no side effects, and it is fully lazy, meaning
all computation is driven by the user interface, down to the pixel level.

[![Screenshot](images/shot1.png)](images/shot1.png)

The CHARISMA workspace for museum technical imaging.

[![Screenshot](images/shot2.png)](images/shot2.png)

A 10,000 node workspace that computes per-voxel Patlaks from PET-CT scans.

# Installing

## Windows

There's a zip for each version on the [releases
page](https://github.com/jcupitt/nip4/releases). Download
`nip4-x86_64-9.0.11.zip`, unzip somewhere, and run `bin/nip4.exe`.

If you see rendering problems, it's worth trying another backend. By default,
nip4 uses Vulkan to draw the UI, and some older versions of Windows can be a
bit wonky for this.

If you see something like a blank window on startup, try:

```console
> set GSK_RENDERER=cairo
> nip4
```

That will use a software only fallback to draw the UI and should work on any
Windows, though it will be a bit slower.

## macOS

nip4 is in [homebrew](https://brew.sh/), so just:

```
brew install nip4
```

## Linux-like systems with flatpak

Add flathub to your set of repositories:

```shell
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists \
  flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

Then install nip4 with:

```shell
flatpak install org.libvips.nip4
```

## From source

Download the sources, then build and install with eg.:

```
cd nip4-x.y.x
meson setup build --prefix /my/install/prefix
cd build
meson compile
meson test
meson install
```

Check the output of `meson setup` carefully.

## From source for Windows

Clone:

https://github.com/libvips/build-win64-mxe

Build with eg.:

```
$ ./build.sh --target x86_64-w64-mingw32.shared --nightly nip4
```

## Build from source for flathub

Add the `flathub` repo, if you don't already have it:

```shell
flatpak remote-add --if-not-exists \
  flathub https://flathub.org/repo/flathub.flatpakrepo
```

Install the gtk4 SDK and runtime:

```shell
flatpak install org.gnome.Sdk//49
flatpak install org.gnome.Platform//49
```

Allow file. Recent security changes to git will cause submodule checkout
to fail inside flatpak. If you get errors like `fatal: transport 'file'
not allowed`, re-enable file transport with:

```shell
git config --global protocol.file.allow always
```

You need the latest `flatpak-builder` (the one in deb is not new enough),
install with:

```
flatpak install org.flatpak.Builder
```

Build and try running it:

```shell
flatpak run org.flatpak.Builder --force-clean --user --install build-dir org.libvips.nip4.json
flatpak run org.libvips.nip4 ~/pics/k2.jpg
```

Force a complete redownload and rebuild (should only rarely be necessary) with:

```shell
rm -rf .flatpak-builder
```

Check the files that are in the flatpak you built with:

```shell
ls build-dir/files
```

Uninstall with:

```shell
flatpak uninstall nip4
```

## Notes on flatpak build process

- niftiio is annoying to build, skip it.

- we skip imagemagick as well, too huge

## Packaging for flathub

Install the appdata checker:

```shell
flatpak install flathub org.freedesktop.appstream-glib
flatpak run org.freedesktop.appstream-glib validate org.libvips.nip4.metainfo.xml
```

Also:

```shell
desktop-file-validate org.libvips.nip4.desktop
```

## Uploading to flathub

Make a PR on:

        https://github.com/flathub/org.libvips.nip4

then check the build status here:

        https://flathub.org/builds/#/apps/org.libvips.nip4

On success, merge to master.
